infra/migrations/README.md, before:

# Database Migration: paper_bankroll Table → View

## Summary

Converted `paper_bankroll` from a **table** (stored state) to a **view** (calculated state) to eliminate data inconsistencies and enforce single source of truth architecture.

## Problem

**Before:** Balance was stored in `paper_bankroll` table and manually updated via:
- `adjust_paper_bankroll_balance()` on every trade
- `update_paper_bankroll()` after settlement
- Manual SQL fixes like `fix_bankroll.sql` when they drifted out of sync

**Issue:** Two sources of truth (`paper_trades` + `paper_bankroll`) led to inconsistencies requiring hardcoded fixes.

## Solution

**After:** Balance is calculated dynamically from `paper_trades`:
```sql
balance = $10,000 - (total BUY) + (total SELL)
```

**Result:** Single source of truth - `paper_trades` is authoritative, `paper_bankroll` view always correct by definition.

## Changes Made

### 1. Database Migration
- **File:** `infra/migrations/0002_bankroll_to_view.sql`
- **Action:** Drop `paper_bankroll` table, create VIEW with same interface
- **Compatibility:** Transparent replacement - existing queries work unchanged

### 2. Code Simplification
- **File:** `packages/shared/shared/db.py`
- **Removed:**
  - `adjust_paper_bankroll_balance()` - no longer needed
  - `update_paper_bankroll()` - no longer needed
  - Balance update logic from `insert_paper_trade()`
- **Updated:**
  - `insert_paper_trade()` - simplified to just insert trade
  - `get_paper_bankroll()` - works unchanged (reads from view)

### 3. Cleanup
- **Deleted:** `fix_bankroll.sql` - hardcoded fix no longer needed/relevant
- **Updated:** `CLAUDE.md` - added architectural principles about derived data

### 4. Verification
- **File:** `ops/scripts/verify_data_integrity.py`
- **Purpose:** Verify database consistency, run before/after deployments

## How to Apply Migration

### Option 1: Fresh Database
If starting fresh:
```bash
psql $DATABASE_URL -f infra/migrations/0001_init.sql
psql $DATABASE_URL -f infra/migrations/0002_bankroll_to_view.sql
```

### Option 2: Existing Database
If you have existing data:

```bash
# 1. Backup current data (optional)
psql $DATABASE_URL -c "CREATE TABLE paper_bankroll_archive AS SELECT * FROM paper_bankroll;"

# 2. Apply migration
psql $DATABASE_URL -f infra/migrations/0002_bankroll_to_view.sql

# 3. Verify integrity
python ops/scripts/verify_data_integrity.py
```

## Benefits

✅ **Single Source of Truth:** `paper_trades` is the only source
✅ **Always Accurate:** Balance calculated from actual transactions
✅ **No Manual Fixes:** Impossible to drift out of sync
✅ **Simpler Code:** Removed 60+ lines of balance update logic
✅ **Better Architecture:** Follows database normalization principles

## Testing

Run integrity checks:
```bash
python ops/scripts/verify_data_integrity.py
```

Expected output:
```
[1/5] Checking paper_bankroll view consistency...
  ✓ Balance correct: $7526.95
  ✓ Total trades correct: 0
  ✓ ROI: -24.73%
  ✓ Total P&L: $0.00

[2/5] Checking active positions...
  ✓ AAPL: 5 shares @ $248.75
  ✓ GOOGL: 5 shares @ $245.86

...

✅ All checks passed (5/5)
```

## Rollback (if needed)

If you need to rollback to the table-based approach:

```sql
DROP VIEW IF EXISTS paper_bankroll;

CREATE TABLE paper_bankroll (
    bankroll_id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    balance NUMERIC(12, 2) NOT NULL,
    total_trades INTEGER DEFAULT 0,
    winning_trades INTEGER DEFAULT 0,
    total_pnl NUMERIC(12, 2) DEFAULT 0.0,
    roi NUMERIC(8, 4) DEFAULT 0.0,
    updated_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
);

-- Calculate and insert current state
INSERT INTO paper_bankroll (balance, total_trades, winning_trades, total_pnl, roi)
SELECT
    10000.00
        - COALESCE((SELECT SUM(quantity * price) FROM paper_trades WHERE action = 'BUY'), 0)
        + COALESCE((SELECT SUM(quantity * price) FROM paper_trades WHERE action = 'SELL'), 0),
    COALESCE((SELECT COUNT(*) FROM paper_trades WHERE status = 'CLOSED'), 0),
    COALESCE((SELECT COUNT(*) FROM paper_trades WHERE status = 'CLOSED' AND profit_loss > 0), 0),
    COALESCE((SELECT SUM(profit_loss) FROM paper_trades WHERE status = 'CLOSED'), 0.00),
    ((10000.00
        - COALESCE((SELECT SUM(quantity * price) FROM paper_trades WHERE action = 'BUY'), 0)
        + COALESCE((SELECT SUM(quantity * price) FROM paper_trades WHERE action = 'SELL'), 0)
    ) - 10000.00) / 10000.00;
```

Then restore the removed functions in `db.py`.

## Performance Notes

- **View recalculates on each query** - acceptable for current usage (~10 queries/minute)
- **If performance becomes an issue** - can convert to MATERIALIZED VIEW
- **Current overhead** - negligible (<10ms per query)

## Architectural Principle

This change enforces a critical principle:

> **Never store derived/calculated data. Always calculate dynamically from the source of truth.**

When you store derived data (like balance), you create cache invalidation problems:
- Must update derived data every time source changes
- Risk of drift if update logic has bugs
- Leads to manual fixes that don't address root cause

Instead:
- Store only source data (`paper_trades`)
- Calculate derived data on-demand (`paper_bankroll` view)
- Data is always correct by definition

## Files Modified

```
✅ Created:
- infra/migrations/0002_bankroll_to_view.sql
- ops/scripts/verify_data_integrity.py
- MIGRATION_NOTES.md (this file)

✅ Modified:
- packages/shared/shared/db.py
- CLAUDE.md

❌ Deleted:
- fix_bankroll.sql
```

## Next Steps

1. Apply migration: `./ops/scripts/apply_migration.sh` (recommended) or manually: `psql $DATABASE_URL -f infra/migrations/0002_bankroll_to_view.sql`
2. Verify integrity: `python ops/scripts/verify_data_integrity.py`
3. Test trading agent: `make trade`
4. Test dashboard: `make dashboard` (visit http://localhost:3001)
5. Commit changes: `git add .` && `git commit -m "Migrate paper_bankroll to dynamic view"`

---

**Date:** October 18, 2025
**Author:** Claude Code
**Status:** Ready for deployment

Commit message:

Document migration 0004 and provider cleanup

infra/migrations/README.md, after:

# Database Migrations

## 0002 – paper_bankroll Table → View

Converted `paper_bankroll` from a **table** (stored state) to a **view** (calculated state) to eliminate data inconsistencies and enforce single source of truth architecture.

## Problem

**Before:** Balance was stored in `paper_bankroll` table and manually updated via:
- `adjust_paper_bankroll_balance()` on every trade
- `update_paper_bankroll()` after settlement
- Manual SQL fixes like `fix_bankroll.sql` when they drifted out of sync

**Issue:** Two sources of truth (`paper_trades` + `paper_bankroll`) led to inconsistencies requiring hardcoded fixes.

## Solution

**After:** Balance is calculated dynamically from `paper_trades`:
```sql
balance = $10,000 - (total BUY) + (total SELL)
```

**Result:** Single source of truth - `paper_trades` is authoritative, `paper_bankroll` view always correct by definition.

## Changes Made

### 1. Database Migration
- **File:** `infra/migrations/0002_bankroll_to_view.sql`
- **Action:** Drop `paper_bankroll` table, create VIEW with same interface
- **Compatibility:** Transparent replacement - existing queries work unchanged

### 2. Code Simplification
- **File:** `packages/shared/shared/db.py`
- **Removed:**
  - `adjust_paper_bankroll_balance()` - no longer needed
  - `update_paper_bankroll()` - no longer needed
  - Balance update logic from `insert_paper_trade()`
- **Updated:**
  - `insert_paper_trade()` - simplified to just insert trade
  - `get_paper_bankroll()` - works unchanged (reads from view)

### 3. Cleanup
- **Deleted:** `fix_bankroll.sql` - hardcoded fix no longer needed/relevant
- **Updated:** `CLAUDE.md` - added architectural principles about derived data

### 4. Verification
- **File:** `ops/scripts/verify_data_integrity.py`
- **Purpose:** Verify database consistency, run before/after deployments

## How to Apply Migration

### Option 1: Fresh Database
If starting fresh:
```bash
psql $DATABASE_URL -f infra/migrations/0001_init.sql
psql $DATABASE_URL -f infra/migrations/0002_bankroll_to_view.sql
```

### Option 2: Existing Database
If you have existing data:

```bash
# 1. Backup current data (optional)
psql $DATABASE_URL -c "CREATE TABLE paper_bankroll_archive AS SELECT * FROM paper_bankroll;"

# 2. Apply migration
psql $DATABASE_URL -f infra/migrations/0002_bankroll_to_view.sql

# 3. Verify integrity
python ops/scripts/verify_data_integrity.py
```

## Benefits

✅ **Single Source of Truth:** `paper_trades` is the only source
✅ **Always Accurate:** Balance calculated from actual transactions
✅ **No Manual Fixes:** Impossible to drift out of sync
✅ **Simpler Code:** Removed 60+ lines of balance update logic
✅ **Better Architecture:** Follows database normalization principles

## Testing

Run integrity checks:
```bash
python ops/scripts/verify_data_integrity.py
```

Expected output:
```
[1/5] Checking paper_bankroll view consistency...
  ✓ Balance correct: $7526.95
  ✓ Total trades correct: 0
  ✓ ROI: -24.73%
  ✓ Total P&L: $0.00

[2/5] Checking active positions...
  ✓ AAPL: 5 shares @ $248.75
  ✓ GOOGL: 5 shares @ $245.86

...

✅ All checks passed (5/5)
```

## Rollback (if needed)

If you need to rollback to the table-based approach:

```sql
DROP VIEW IF EXISTS paper_bankroll;

CREATE TABLE paper_bankroll (
    bankroll_id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    balance NUMERIC(12, 2) NOT NULL,
    total_trades INTEGER DEFAULT 0,
    winning_trades INTEGER DEFAULT 0,
    total_pnl NUMERIC(12, 2) DEFAULT 0.0,
    roi NUMERIC(8, 4) DEFAULT 0.0,
    updated_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
);

-- Calculate and insert current state
INSERT INTO paper_bankroll (balance, total_trades, winning_trades, total_pnl, roi)
SELECT
    10000.00
        - COALESCE((SELECT SUM(quantity * price) FROM paper_trades WHERE action = 'BUY'), 0)
        + COALESCE((SELECT SUM(quantity * price) FROM paper_trades WHERE action = 'SELL'), 0),
    COALESCE((SELECT COUNT(*) FROM paper_trades WHERE status = 'CLOSED'), 0),
    COALESCE((SELECT COUNT(*) FROM paper_trades WHERE status = 'CLOSED' AND profit_loss > 0), 0),
    COALESCE((SELECT SUM(profit_loss) FROM paper_trades WHERE status = 'CLOSED'), 0.00),
    ((10000.00
        - COALESCE((SELECT SUM(quantity * price) FROM paper_trades WHERE action = 'BUY'), 0)
        + COALESCE((SELECT SUM(quantity * price) FROM paper_trades WHERE action = 'SELL'), 0)
    ) - 10000.00) / 10000.00;
```

Then restore the removed functions in `db.py`.

## Performance Notes

- **View recalculates on each query** - acceptable for current usage (~10 queries/minute)
- **If performance becomes an issue** - can convert to MATERIALIZED VIEW
- **Current overhead** - negligible (<10ms per query)

## Architectural Principle

This change enforces a critical principle:

> **Never store derived/calculated data. Always calculate dynamically from the source of truth.**

When you store derived data (like balance), you create cache invalidation problems:
- Must update derived data every time source changes
- Risk of drift if update logic has bugs
- Leads to manual fixes that don't address root cause

Instead:
- Store only source data (`paper_trades`)
- Calculate derived data on-demand (`paper_bankroll` view)
- Data is always correct by definition

## Files Modified

```
✅ Created:
- infra/migrations/0002_bankroll_to_view.sql
- ops/scripts/verify_data_integrity.py
- MIGRATION_NOTES.md (this file)

✅ Modified:
- packages/shared/shared/db.py
- CLAUDE.md

❌ Deleted:
- fix_bankroll.sql
```

## Next Steps

1. Apply migration: `./ops/scripts/apply_migration.sh` (recommended) or manually: `psql $DATABASE_URL -f infra/migrations/0002_bankroll_to_view.sql`
2. Verify integrity: `python ops/scripts/verify_data_integrity.py`
3. Test trading agent: `make trade`
4. Test dashboard: `make dashboard` (visit http://localhost:3001)
5. Commit changes: `git add .` && `git commit -m "Migrate paper_bankroll to dynamic view"`

---

**Date:** October 18, 2025
**Author:** Claude Code
**Status:** Ready for deployment

---

## 0004 – Remove Alpha Vantage Artifacts

### Summary

Dropped the unused `api_usage_log` table that tracked Alpha Vantage API consumption. Polygon.io is the only supported market data provider, so the logging table was dead weight.

### Changes

- **File:** `infra/migrations/0004_remove_alpha_vantage_artifacts.sql`
- **Action:** `DROP TABLE IF EXISTS api_usage_log`
- **Rationale:** Simplifies schema and removes references to deprecated integrations.

### Applying the Migration

Run the new migration after `0003`:

```bash
psql $DATABASE_URL -f infra/migrations/0004_remove_alpha_vantage_artifacts.sql
```

No data transformation is required.

### Rollback

If you ever need to restore the table (unlikely), re-create it using the definition originally bundled in `0001_init.sql`.
